EXECUTIVE ORDER 
No13: ESTABLISHING THE NEW YORK STATE COUNCIL ON FOOD POLICY
 
WHEREAS, agriculture is a critically important industry to the State of New York; and  
WHEREAS, New York should take affirmative steps to support its agricultural industry; and  
WHEREAS, hunger in New York and elsewhere is a serious problem facing many families; and  
WHEREAS, access to affordable, fresh, nutritious food, including fresh fruit and vegetables, 
especially for children, is a serious problem facing many families; and  
WHEREAS, there are significant environmental, health and economic benefits to the State and its 
residents from expanding agricultural production, including locally-grown and organically-grown 
food;  
NOW, THEREFORE, I, Eliot Spitzer, Governor of the State of New York, by virtue of the authority 
vested in me by the Constitution and the laws of the State of New York, do hereby order as follows:  
1. There is hereby created a New York State Council on Food Policy.  
2. The Council shall consist of twenty-one members appointed by the Governor as follows: (a) the 
Commissioner of Agriculture and Markets, the Commissioner of Health, the Commissioner of the 
Office of Temporary Disability Assistance, the Commissioner of Education, the Commissioner of the 
Department of Economic Development and the Director of the Office for the Aging; (b) four 
members with experience and expertise related to agriculture, nutrition or food policy appointed on 
the recommendation of the legislative leaders, one each by the Temporary President of the Senate, 
the Speaker of the Assembly, the Minority Leader of the Senate, and the Minority Leader of the 
Assembly; (c) the Dean of the New York State College of Agriculture and Life Sciences; (d) one 
member representing farm organizations; (e) one member representing school food administrators; 
(f) one member representing consumers; (g) two members representing an organization that 
provides food assistance; (h) one member representing anti-hunger advocates; (i) one member 
who is a nutritionist; and (j) three members representing the food industry, including producers, 
distributors, processors or retailers who are residents of and work in the State of New York, at least 
one of whom produces organic food.  
3. The Commissioner of Agriculture and Markets shall serve as the Chairperson of the Council. The 
members of the Council who serve in an ex officio capacity may designate a representative to 
participate on the Council on their behalf.  
4. The Council shall set the time and place of its meetings and meet as frequently as business 
requires but shall meet at least twice each year. A majority of the members of the Council shall 
constitute a quorum, and an affirmative vote of the majority of the members of the Council shall be 
required for any action by the Council.  
5. The Council shall: (a) develop and recommend a food policy for the State which recognizes that it 
is in the best interests of the State to ensure the availability of an adequate supply of affordable, 
fresh, nutritious food to its residents; (b) develop and recommend State policies to expand 
agricultural production, including locally-grown and organically-grown food; (c) develop and 
recommend a strategic plan for implementation of the State food policy, including benchmarks and 
criteria for measuring progress in achieving State food policy objectives; and (d) offer comments on 
State regulations, legislation and budget proposals in the area of food policy, to ensure a 
coordinated and comprehensive inter-agency approach to food policy issues.  
6. The Council shall issue a written report on the first day of December each year on: (a) the 
activities of the Council during the preceding year; (b) recommended food policies for the State; (c) 
recommended changes to the strategic plan; (d) an account of the progress made in achieving the 
goals of the Council; and (e) actions which are necessary to implement the recommendations of the 
Council and effectuate the purposes of this Order.  
7. No member of the Council shall be disqualified from holding any public office or employment, nor 
shall he or she forfeit any such office or employment by virtue of his or her appointment hereunder. 
Members of the Council shall receive no compensation for their services but shall be allowed their 
actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their functions hereunder. All 
members of the Council shall serve at the pleasure of the Governor and vacancies shall be filled in 
the same manner as original appointments.  
8. Every agency department, office, division or public authority of this State shall cooperate with the 
Council and furnish such information and assistance as the Council determines is reasonably 
necessary to accomplish its purpose.  
G I V E N under my hand and the Privy Seal of the State in the City of New York this eighteenth day 
of May in the year two thousand seven.  
BY THE GOVERNOR  
Secretary to the Governor  
 
